---
name: Ilkka Heinonen
role: featured
order: 2
image: ilkka-heinonen.jpg
---

Ilkka Heinonen is a Helsinki-based musician and composer specialising in folk and world music, playing the <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span>, double bass, <span lang="it">violone</span>, and <span lang="it">viola da gamba</span> — with a passion for early music. As one of the pioneers of <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> playing, Heinonen has sought to expand the possibilities of the instrument. In his solo programmes, Heinonen explores the boundaries between the sacred and the secular through the performance practices of Karelian <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> music and early music, as on his solo instrumental album <cite><span lang="fi">Käki</span></cite> (2023), which explores the sound of the instrument in depth. The Ilkka Heinonen Trio, which has released two critically acclaimed albums (<cite><span lang="fi">Savu</span></cite> 2015 and <cite><span lang="fi">Lohtu</span></cite> 2021), draws its experimental sound from European jazz and Renaissance music alike.

Heinonen has also premiered all the concertos composed for the <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> so far (comp. Timothy Page 2013, Krishna Nagaraja 2017). Heinonen plays the <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> in Ensemble Gamut!, which combines elements of medieval music, Finnish folk songs, improvisation, and electronic soundscapes. The ensemble’s unique sound can be heard in concerts and on the albums <cite>UT</cite> (2020) and <cite>RE</cite> (2022). Sámi singer <span lang="se">Ánnámáret</span>’s band has taken Heinonen deep into the world of ancient <span lang="se">luohtis</span>, contemporary music and electronically manipulated <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> sounds, as in the albums <cite><span lang="se">Nieguid Duovdagat</span></cite> (2021) and <cite><span lang="se">Bálvvosbáiki</span></cite> (2024). Heinonen has also performed with <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> quartet <span lang="fi">Jouhiorkesteri</span> in numerous countries from Europe to Asia. Ilkka Heinonen is active as a double bassist and G-<span lang="it">violone</span> player in baroque ensembles and performs especially in Nordic and Eastern European folk music ensembles. Heinonen also works regularly with contemporary dance and music theatre. Heinonen is currently completing his artistic doctorate on the expressive possibilities of the <span lang="fi">jouhikko</span> at the Sibelius Academy’s <span lang="fi">MuTri</span> doctoral programme.
